# Observing the service mesh
In this section, we will use Kiali together with Jaeger to observe what's going on in the service mesh. For performance monitoring using Grafana, refer to Chapter 20, Monitoring Microservices.

Before we do that, we need to get rid of some noise created by the health checks performed by Kubernetes' liveness and readiness probes. In the previous chapters, they have been using the same port as the API requests. This means that Istio will collect telematics data for both health checks and requests sent to the API. This will cause the graphs shown by Kiali to become unnecessarily cluttered. Kiali can filter out traffic that we are not interested in, but a simpler solution is to use a different port for the health checks.
Microservices can be configured to use a separate port for requests sent to the actuator endpoints, for example, health checks sent to the /actuator/health endpoint. The following line has been added to the common configuration file for all microservices, ***config-repo/application.yml***:
```
   management.server.port: 4004
```
This will make all microservices use port 4004 to expose the health endpoints. All deployment files in the kubernetes/services/base/deployments folder have been updated to use port 4004 in their liveness and readiness probes.

The Spring Cloud Gateway (this is retained so we can run tests in Docker Compose) will continue to use the same port for requests to the API and the health endpoint. In
the config-repo/gateway.yml configuration file, the management port is reverted to the port used for the API:
```
   management.server.port: 8443
```

With the requests sent to the health endpoint out of the way, we can start to send some requests through the service mesh.

We will start a low-volume load test using siege, which we got to know in Chapter 16, Deploying Our Microservices to Kubernetes (refer to the Performing a rolling upgrade section). After that, we will go through some of the most important parts of Kiali to see how Kiali can be used to observe a service mesh. We will also explore Kiali's integration with Jaeger and how Jaeger is used for distributed tracing:

Start the test with the following commands:
```bash
   ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl -k https://writer:secret@minikube.me/oauth/token -d    grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq  .access_token -r)
   
   siege https://minikube.me/product-composite/2 -H "Authorization: Bearer    $ACCESS_TOKEN" -c1 -d1
```
The first command will get an OAuth 2.0/OIDC access token that will be used in the next command, where siege is used to submit one HTTP request per second to the product- composite API.

Expect output from the siege command as follows:
```
{	"transactions":			         111,
	"availability":			      100.00,
	"elapsed_time":			      174.04,
	"data_transferred":		        0.08,
	"response_time":		        0.10,
	"transaction_rate":		        0.64,
	"throughput":			        0.00,
	"concurrency":			        0.06,
	"successful_transactions":	         112,
	"failed_transactions":		           0,
	"longest_transaction":		        0.36,
	"shortest_transaction":		        0.07
}

```

1. Open Kiali's web UI using
the ```http://kiali.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:20001/kiali``` URL in a web browser and log in with the following username and password: ```admin``` and ```admin```. Expect a web page similar to the following:

2. Click on the ***Overview*** tab, if not already active.
3. Click on the graph icon in the ***hands-on*** namespace. Expect a graph to be shown, representing the current traffic flow through the service mesh, along the lines of the following:
4. Click on the Display-button, unselect Service Nodes, and select Traffic Animation.
Kiali displays a graph representing requests that are currently sent through the service mesh, where active requests are represented by small moving circles along with arrows.

This gives a pretty good initial overview of what's going on in the service mesh!

5. Let's now look at some distributed tracing using Jaeger:
6. Click on the product node.
7. Click on the Service: product link. On the web page for the service, click on the Traces tab in the menu and Kiali will use Jaeger to show an embedded view of traces that the product service is involved in. Expect a web page such as the following:
8. Click on one of the traces to examine it. Expect a web page such as the following:

This is basically the same tracing information as Zipkin, made available in Chapter 14, Understanding Distributed Tracing.

There is much more to explore, but this is enough by way of an introduction. Feel free to explore the web UI in Kiali, Jaeger, and Grafana on your own.

Let's move on and learn how Istio can be used to improve security in the service mesh!
