# Securing a service mesh
In this section, we will learn how to use Istio to improve the security of a service mesh. We will cover the following topics:
- How to protect external endpoints with HTTPS and certificates
- How to require that external requests are authenticated using OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens
- How to protect internal communication using mutual authentication (mTLS)  

Let's now understand each of these in the following sections.
## Protecting external endpoints with HTTPS and certificates
In the Creating the service mesh section, we saw how the ***Istio Ingress Gateway (Chapter18/kubernetes/services/base/istio/gateway.yml)*** is configured to use the following certificate files to protect external requests sent to minikube.me using HTTPS. The Istio Ingress Gateway is configured as follows:
```
  spec:
     servers:
     - hosts:
       - "minikube.me"
       ...
       tls:
         mode: SIMPLE
         serverCertificate: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.crt
         privateKey: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.key
```
But where did these files come from, you may ask?
We can see how the Istio Ingress Gateway is configured by running the following command:
```bash
   kubectl -n istio-system get deploy istio-ingressgateway -o json
```
We will find that it is prepared to mount an optional secret named ***istio-ingressgateway-certs*** and that it will be mapped to the
folder, ***/etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/***:
```bash 
$ kubectl -n istio-system get deploy istio-ingressgateway -o yaml

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
...(ommit)    
spec:
  ....(ommit)
  template:
    ....(ommit)
    spec:
      ....(ommit)
      containers:
      - args:
        ....(ommit)
        volumeMounts:
        ....(ommit)
        - mountPath: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs
          name: ingressgateway-certs
          readOnly: true
        - mountPath: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-ca-certs
          name: ingressgateway-ca-certs
          readOnly: true
      dnsPolicy: ClusterFirst
      ....(ommit)
      volumes:
      ...(ommit)
      - name: ingressgateway-certs
        secret:
          defaultMode: 420
          optional: true
          secretName: istio-ingressgateway-certs
      - name: ingressgateway-ca-certs
        secret:
          defaultMode: 420
          optional: true
          secretName: istio-ingressgateway-ca-certs
status:
  availableReplicas: 1
  ...(ommit)
```

This results in certificate files, ***tls.crt*** and ***tls.key***, from a secret named ***istio-ingressgateway-certs*** being made available to the Istio Ingress Gateway on
the ***/etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.crt*** and ***/etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.key*** file paths.

Creating of this secret is handled by means of the ***deploy-dev-env.bash*** and ***deploy-prod-env.bash*** deployment scripts, found in the ***kubernetes/scripts*** folder, by means of the following command:

```bash
   kubectl create -n istio-system secret tls istio-ingressgateway-certs \
   --key kubernetes/cert/tls.key --cert kubernetes/cert/tls.crt
```

The certificate files were created in ***Chapter 17, Implementing Kubernetes Features as an Alternative*** (refer to the ****Testing with Kubernetes ConfigMaps, secrets, and ingress*** section).

To verify that it is these certificates that are used by the Istio Ingress Gateway, we can run the following command:

```bash
   keytool -printcert -sslserver minikube.me:443 | grep -E "Owner:|Issuer:"
   
   Owner: O=minikube.me, CN=minikube.me
   Issuer: O=minikube.me, CN=minikube.me
```
The output shows that the certificate is issued for ***minikube.se*** and that it is self-signed; that is, the issuer is also ***minikube.me***.

This self-signed certificate can be replaced with a certificate bought by a trusted certificate authority (CA) for production use cases. Istio has recently added support for the automated provisioning of trusted certificates using, for example, the cert manager and Let's Encrypt, as we did in ***Chapter 17, Implementing Kubernetes Features as an Alternative***(refer to the ***Provisioning certificates with the cert manager and Let's Encrypt*** section). This support is currently a bit too complex to fit into this chapter.

With the certificate configuration verified, let's now move on to see how the Istio Ingress Gateway can protect microservices from unauthenticated requests.

## Authenticating external requests using OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens
Istio Ingress Gateway is capable of requiring and validating JWT-based OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens, in other words, protecting the microservices in the service mesh from external unauthenticated requests. For a recap on JWT, OAuth 2.0, and OIDC, refer to ***Chapter 11, Secure Access to APIs*** (see the ***Authenticating and authorizing API access using OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect*** section ,page 309 ).

To enable authentication, we need to create an Istio ***Policy*** object that specifies which targets should be protected and which access token issuers, that is, OAuth 2.0/OIDC providers, should be trusted. This is done in the ***kubernetes/services/base/istio/jwt-authentication-policy.yml*** file and appears as follows:
```
apiVersion: "authentication.istio.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "Policy"
metadata:
  name: "jwt-authentication-policy"
spec:
  targets:
  - name: product-composite
  peers:
  - mtls:
      mode: PERMISSIVE
  origins:
  - jwt:
      issuer: "http://auth-server.local"
      jwksUri: "http://auth-server.hands-on.svc.cluster.local/.well-known/jwks.json"
  principalBinding: USE_ORIGIN
```
Explanations for the preceding source code are as follows:
- The ***targets*** list specifies that the authentication check will be performed for requests sent to the ***product-composite*** microservice.
- The ***origins*** list specifies the OAuth 2.0/OIDC providers we rely on. For each issuer, the name of the issuer and the URL for its JSON web key set are specified. For a recap, see ***Chapter 11, Securing Access to APIs*** (refer to the ***Introducing OpenId Connect*** section). We have specified the local auth server, ***http://auth-server.local***.

The policy file was applied by the ***kubernetes/scripts/deploy-dev-env.bash*** deployment script, when it was used in the ***Running commands to create the service mesh*** section.

The easiest way to verify that an invalid request is rejected by the Istio Ingress Gateway and not the ***product-composite*** microservice is to make a request without an access token and observe the error message that is returned. The Istio Ingress Gateway returns the following error message, ***Origin authentication failed***., in the event of a failed authentication, while the product-composite microservice returns an empty string. Both return the HTTP code ***401*** (Unauthorized).

Try it out with the following commands:

1. Make a request without an access token along the lines of the following:
  ```bash
     curl https://minikube.me/product-composite/2 -kw " HTTP Code:%{http_code}\n"
  ```
   Expect a response saying ***Origin authentication failed. HTTP Code: 401***.
   
2. Temporarily delete the policy with the following command:
  ```bash
     kubectl delete -f kubernetes/services/base/istio/jwt-authentication-policy.yml
  ```
  - Wait a minute to allow that policy change to be propagated to the Istio Ingress Gateway and then retry the request without an access token. The response should now only contain the ***HTTP code: HTTP Code: 401***.
   
3. Enable the policy again with the following command:
  ```bash
     kubectl apply -f kubernetes/services/base/istio/jwt-authentication-policy.yml
  ```
  - ***Suggested additional exercise***: Try out the Auth0 OIDC provider, as described in ***Chapter 11, Securing Access to APIs*** (refer to the ***Testing with an OpenID Connect provider, Auth0***, section. Add your Auth0 provider to ***jwt-authentication-policy.yml***. In my case, it appears as follows:
    ```bash
       - jwt:
          issuer: "https://dev-magnus.eu.auth0.com/"
          jwksUri: "https://dev-magnus.eu.auth0.com/.well-known/jwks.json"
    ```

Now, let's move on to the last security mechanism that we will cover in Istio – the automatic protection of internal communication in the service mesh using mutual authentication, mTLS.

## Protecting internal communication using mutual authentication (mTLS)
