# Securing a service mesh
In this section, we will learn how to use Istio to improve the security of a service mesh. We will cover the following topics:
- How to protect external endpoints with HTTPS and certificates
- How to require that external requests are authenticated using OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens
- How to protect internal communication using mutual authentication (mTLS)  

Let's now understand each of these in the following sections.
## Protecting external endpoints with HTTPS and certificates
In the Creating the service mesh section, we saw how the ***Istio Ingress Gateway (Chapter18/kubernetes/services/base/istio/gateway.yml)*** is configured to use the following certificate files to protect external requests sent to minikube.me using HTTPS. The Istio Ingress Gateway is configured as follows:
```
  spec:
     servers:
     - hosts:
       - "minikube.me"
       ...
       tls:
         mode: SIMPLE
         serverCertificate: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.crt
         privateKey: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.key
```
But where did these files come from, you may ask?
We can see how the Istio Ingress Gateway is configured by running the following command:
```bash
   kubectl -n istio-system get deploy istio-ingressgateway -o json
```
We will find that it is prepared to mount an optional secret named ***istio-ingressgateway-certs*** and that it will be mapped to the
folder, ***/etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/***:
```bash 
$ kubectl -n istio-system get deploy istio-ingressgateway -o yaml

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
...(ommit)    
spec:
  ....(ommit)
  template:
    ....(ommit)
    spec:
      ....(ommit)
      containers:
      - args:
        ....(ommit)
        volumeMounts:
        ....(ommit)
        - mountPath: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs
          name: ingressgateway-certs
          readOnly: true
        - mountPath: /etc/istio/ingressgateway-ca-certs
          name: ingressgateway-ca-certs
          readOnly: true
      dnsPolicy: ClusterFirst
      ....(ommit)
      volumes:
      ...(ommit)
      - name: ingressgateway-certs
        secret:
          defaultMode: 420
          optional: true
          secretName: istio-ingressgateway-certs
      - name: ingressgateway-ca-certs
        secret:
          defaultMode: 420
          optional: true
          secretName: istio-ingressgateway-ca-certs
status:
  availableReplicas: 1
  ...(ommit)
```

This results in certificate files, ***tls.crt*** and ***tls.key***, from a secret named ***istio-ingressgateway-certs*** being made available to the Istio Ingress Gateway on
the ***/etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.crt*** and ***/etc/istio/ingressgateway-certs/tls.key*** file paths.

Creating of this secret is handled by means of the ***deploy-dev-env.bash*** and ***deploy-prod-env.bash*** deployment scripts, found in the ***kubernetes/scripts*** folder, by means of the following command:

```bash
   kubectl create -n istio-system secret tls istio-ingressgateway-certs \
   --key kubernetes/cert/tls.key --cert kubernetes/cert/tls.crt
```

The certificate files were created in ***Chapter 17, Implementing Kubernetes Features as an Alternative*** (refer to the ****Testing with Kubernetes ConfigMaps, secrets, and ingress*** section page470 ).
- The self-signed certificate has been created with the following command:
```bash
openssl req -x509 -sha256 -nodes -days 365 -newkey rsa:2048 -keyout kubernetes/cert/tls.key -out kubernetes/cert/tls.crt -subj "/CN=minikube.me/O=minikube.me"
```

- To inspect expiration date from the crt file itself
```
% openssl x509 -enddate -noout -in tls.crt
notAfter=Jul  3 13:17:28 2020 GMT
```

To verify that it is these certificates that are used by the Istio Ingress Gateway, we can run the following command:

```bash
   keytool -printcert -sslserver minikube.me:443 | grep -E "Owner:|Issuer:"
   
   Owner: O=minikube.me, CN=minikube.me
   Issuer: O=minikube.me, CN=minikube.me
```
The output shows that the certificate is issued for ***minikube.se*** and that it is self-signed; that is, the issuer is also ***minikube.me***.

This self-signed certificate can be replaced with a certificate bought by a trusted certificate authority (CA) for production use cases. Istio has recently added support for the automated provisioning of trusted certificates using, for example, the cert manager and Let's Encrypt, as we did in ***Chapter 17, Implementing Kubernetes Features as an Alternative***(refer to the ***Provisioning certificates with the cert manager and Let's Encrypt*** section). This support is currently a bit too complex to fit into this chapter.

With the certificate configuration verified, let's now move on to see how the Istio Ingress Gateway can protect microservices from unauthenticated requests.

## Authenticating external requests using OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens
Istio Ingress Gateway is capable of requiring and validating JWT-based OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens, in other words, protecting the microservices in the service mesh from external unauthenticated requests. For a recap on JWT, OAuth 2.0, and OIDC, refer to ***Chapter 11, Secure Access to APIs*** (see the ***Authenticating and authorizing API access using OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect*** section ,page 309 ).

To enable authentication, we need to create an Istio ***Policy*** object that specifies which targets should be protected and which access token issuers, that is, OAuth 2.0/OIDC providers, should be trusted. This is done in the ***kubernetes/services/base/istio/jwt-authentication-policy.yml*** file and appears as follows (istio version 1.5- ):
```
apiVersion: "authentication.istio.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "Policy"
metadata:
  name: "jwt-authentication-policy"
spec:
  targets:
  - name: product-composite
  peers:
  - mtls:
      mode: PERMISSIVE
  origins:
  - jwt:
      issuer: "http://auth-server.local"
      jwksUri: "http://auth-server.hands-on.svc.cluster.local/.well-known/jwks.json"
  principalBinding: USE_ORIGIN
```
Explanations for the preceding source code are as follows:
- The ***targets*** list specifies that the authentication check will be performed for requests sent to the ***product-composite*** microservice.
- The ***origins*** list specifies the OAuth 2.0/OIDC providers we rely on. For each issuer, the name of the issuer and the URL for its JSON web key set are specified. For a recap, see ***Chapter 11, Securing Access to APIs*** (refer to the ***Introducing OpenId Connect*** section). We have specified the local auth server, ***http://auth-server.local***.
- spec is loacated in URL 
  - https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-jwt/  
  - https://istio.io/v1.2/docs/tasks/security/rbac-groups/ 
  - https://istio.io/v1.5/docs/reference/config/security/istio.authentication.v1alpha1/
  - https://istio.io/v1.6/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-jwt/
- If  use istio 1.6+ , you have to refer https://cloud.google.com/service-mesh/docs/security/update-authentication-policies , https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/openshift_container_platform/4.6/pdf/service_mesh/OpenShift_Container_Platform-4.6-Service_Mesh-en-US.pdf to update the RequestAuthentication
  ```
   kubectl get crds -A
   kubectl get requestauthentications.security.istio.io -A
  ```
- Update to RequestAuthentication  
  The following example shows how to update from the alpha ***Policy*** to ***RequestAuthentication***:
  ```
  apiVersion: "security.istio.io/v1beta1"
  kind: "RequestAuthentication"
  metadata:
    name: "jwt-authentication-policy"
  spec:
    selector:
      matchLabels:
        app: product-composite
    jwtRules:
    - issuer: "http://auth-server.local"
      jwksUri: "http://auth-server.hands-on.svc.cluster.local/.well-known/jwks.json"
  ```
- Update to PeerAuthentication  
You must also update authentication policies for mutual TLS (mTLS). The alpha ***MeshPolicy*** enabled mesh-wide ***PERMISSIVE*** or ***STRICT*** mTLS. The beta ***PeerAuthentication*** resource replaces the alpha ***MeshPolicy***. Specifically, if you have a ***MeshPolicy*** similar to the following:
```
apiVersion: "authentication.istio.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "MeshPolicy"
metadata:
  name: "default"
  labels:
    release: istio
spec:
  peers:
  - mtls:
      mode: PERMISSIVE
```
Update it with a PeerAuthentication resource in the root namespace:  

```
apiVersion: "security.istio.io/v1beta1"
kind: "PeerAuthentication"
metadata:
  name: "default"
  namespace: "istio-system"
spec:
  mtls:
    mode: PERMISSIVE
``` 
principalBinding: USE_ORIGIN
```
  #Require JWT token to access product page service from 
  #any client to all paths except /health_check
  apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
  kind: AuthorizationPolicy
  metadata:
    name: product-composite-mTLS-with-JWT
  spec:
    action: ALLOW 
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          # this should match the selector for the "product-composite" service
          app: product-composite 
        rules:
        - to: # require JWT token to access all other paths 
          - operation:
              notPaths:
              - /health_check 
          from:
            - source:
              # if using principalBinding: USE_PEER in the Policy, 
              # then use principals, e.g.
              # principals:
              # - “*”
              requestPrincipals:
              - “*”
        - to: # no JWT token required to access health_check
          - operation: 
              paths:
              - /health_check
  ```

The policy file was applied by the ***kubernetes/scripts/deploy-dev-env.bash*** deployment script, when it was used in the ***Running commands to create the service mesh*** section.

The easiest way to verify that an invalid request is rejected by the Istio Ingress Gateway and not the ***product-composite*** microservice is to make a request without an access token and observe the error message that is returned. The Istio Ingress Gateway returns the following error message, ***Origin authentication failed***., in the event of a failed authentication, while the product-composite microservice returns an empty string. Both return the HTTP code ***401*** (Unauthorized).

Try it out with the following commands:

1. Make a request without an access token along the lines of the following:
  ```bash
     curl https://minikube.me/product-composite/2 -kw " HTTP Code:%{http_code}\n"
  ```
   Expect a response saying ***Origin authentication failed. HTTP Code: 401***.
   
2. Temporarily delete the policy with the following command:
  ```bash
     kubectl delete -f kubernetes/services/base/istio/jwt-authentication-policy.yml
  ```
  - Wait a minute to allow that policy change to be propagated to the Istio Ingress Gateway and then retry the request without an access token. The response should now only contain the ***HTTP code: HTTP Code: 401***.
   
3. Enable the policy again with the following command:
  ```bash
     kubectl apply -f kubernetes/services/base/istio/jwt-authentication-policy.yml
  ```
  - ***Suggested additional exercise***: Try out the Auth0 OIDC provider, as described in ***Chapter 11, Securing Access to APIs*** (refer to the ***Testing with an OpenID Connect provider, Auth0***, section. Add your Auth0 provider to ***jwt-authentication-policy.yml***. In my case, it appears as follows:
    ```bash
       - jwt:
          issuer: "https://dev-magnus.eu.auth0.com/"
          jwksUri: "https://dev-magnus.eu.auth0.com/.well-known/jwks.json"
    ```

Now, let's move on to the last security mechanism that we will cover in Istio – the automatic protection of internal communication in the service mesh using mutual authentication, mTLS.

## Protecting internal communication using mutual authentication (mTLS)
In this section, we will learn how Istio can be configured to automatically protect internal communication within the service mesh using mutual authentication, mTLS. When using mutual authentication, not only does the service side prove its identity by exposing a certificate, but also the clients prove their identity to the servers by exposing a client-side certificate. This provides a higher level of security compared to normal TLS/HTTPS usage, where only the identity of the server is proven. Setting up and maintaining mutual authentication; that is, the provision of new, and the rotating of outdated, certificates, is known to be complex and is therefore seldom used. Istio fully automates the provisioning and rotation of certificates for mutual authentication used for internal communication inside the service mesh. This makes it much easier to use mutual authentication compared to setting it up manually.

So, why should we use mutual authentication? Isn't it sufficient to protect external APIs with HTTPS and OAuth 2.0/OIDC access tokens?
As long as the attacks come through the external API, it might be sufficient. But what if a pod inside the Kubernetes cluster becomes compromised? For example, if an attacker gains control over a pod, then the attacker can start listening to traffic between other pods in the Kubernetes cluster. If the internal communication is sent as plain text, it will be very easy for the attacker to gain access to sensitive information sent between pods in the cluster. To minimize the damage caused by such an intrusion, mutual authentication can be used to prevent an attacker from eavesdropping on internal network traffic.

To enable the use of mutual authentication managed by Istio, Istio needs to be configured both on the server side, using a policy, and on the client side, using a destination rule.

When using the demo configuration of Istio version 1.5-, as we did in the Deploying Istio in a Kubernetes cluster section, we got a global mesh policy created that configures the server side to use a permissive mode, meaning the Istio proxies will allow both plain text and encrypted requests. This can be verified with the following command:

- istio 1.5.x
  ```bash
     kubectl get meshpolicy default -o yaml
  ```
Expect a response similar to the following:
- istio 1.2.x
```
apiVersion: "authentication.istio.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "MeshPolicy"
metadata:
  name: "default"
  labels:
    release: istio
spec:
  peers:
  - mtls:
      mode: PERMISSIVE
```
- [istio 1.4.x](https://istio.io/latest/news/releases/1.4.x/announcing-1.4/)
  - [v1beta1 authorization policy](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2019/v1beta1-authorization-policy/) replace the old v1alpha1 RBAC policy.  
- [istio 1.5.x](https://istio.io/latest/news/releases/1.5.x/announcing-1.5/)
  - With 1.5, all security policies including [Auto mTLS](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#auto-mutual-tls), AuthenticationPolicy (PeerAuthentication and RequestAuthentication) and authorization are now in Beta. SDS is now stable.

- istio 1.6+
  - You must also update authentication policies for mutual TLS (mTLS). The alpha MeshPolicy enabled mesh-wide PERMISSIVE or STRICT mTLS. The beta PeerAuthentication resource replaces the alpha MeshPolicy. 
    ```bash
       kubectl get peerauthentication default -o yaml
    ```
    Expect a response similar to the following:
    ```
    apiVersion: "security.istio.io/v1beta1"
    kind: "PeerAuthentication"
    metadata:
      name: "default"
      namespace: "istio-system"
    spec:
      mtls:
        mode: PERMISSIVE
    ```
    Prior to Anthos Service Mesh 1.5, the default installation includes MeshPolicy with **RMISSIVE**  with PERMISSIVE mode. Anthos Service Mesh 1.5 and later no longer generates MeshPolicy.

    1.  We recommend that you use namespace-based PeerAuthentication. Although Anthos Service Mesh supports auto mTLS, it only works well with mesh-level or namespace-level PeerAuthentication. When you use workload-level PeerAuthentication, you need to configure a corresponding DestinationRule.
    2.  You could configure the alpha authentication policy to use Origin authentication to deny requests. The new RequestAuthentication however, only rejects requests when the token is invalid. We recommend that you use an AuthorizationPolicyto define further access control.
    3.  Although the alpha authentication policy still works in Anthos Service Mesh 1.5.x, the alpha authentication policy will be fully deprecated in the next release. We recommend that you finish the migration as soon as possible.
    4.  During the transition, if both alpha and beta policies exist, only the beta policies take effect and alpha policies are ignored.
    5.  For more information, see Authentication Policy in the Istio documentation.


To configure microservices to use mutual authentication when sending requests internally to other microservices, a destination rule is created for each microservice. This is done in the ***kubernetes/services/base/istio/internal_mtls_destination_rules.yml*** fil e. The destination rules all look the same; for example, for the product-composite service, they appear as follows:
```bash
   apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
   kind: DestinationRule
   metadata:
     name: product-composite-dr
   spec:
     host: product-composite
     trafficPolicy:
       tls:
         mode: ISTIO_MUTUAL
```
***trafficPolicy*** is set to use ***tls*** with ***ISTIO_MUTUAL***, meaning mutual authentication is managed by Istio.

The destination rules were applied by the ***kubernetes/scripts/deploy-dev-env.bash*** deployment script, when it was used in the preceding ***Running commands to  create the service mesh*** section.

To verify that the internal communication is protected, perform the following steps:

1. Ensure that the load tests started in the preceding Observing the service mesh section are still running.
2. Go to the Kiali graph in a web browser (***http://kiali.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:20001/kiali***).
3. Click on the ***Display*** button to enable the ***Security*** label. The graph will show a padlock on all communication links that are protected by Istio's automated mutual authentication, as follows:

Expect a padlock on all links except for those to resource managers – RabbitMQ, MySQL, and MongoDB.

- Calls to RabbitMQ, MySQL, and MongoDB are not handled by Istio proxies, and therefore require manual configuration to be protected using TLS.

With this, we have seen all three security mechanisms in Istio in action, and it's now time to see how Istio can help us to verify that a service mesh is resilient.
