# Testing with Kubernetes ConfigMaps, secrets, and ingress resource
<!-- MarkdownTOC -->
- [Testing with Kubernetes ConfigMaps, secrets, and ingress resource](#testing-with-kubernetes-configmaps-secrets-and-ingress-resource)
    - [Walking through the deploy script](#walking-through-the-deploy-scripts)
    - [Running commands for deploying and testing](#running-commands-for-deploying-and-testing)
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->
The deployment uses the same type of commands as we used in Chapter 16, Deploying Our Microservices to Kubernetes; refer to the Deploying to Kubernetes for development and test
section.

The major differences are that this deployment will:

- Create one config map for each microservice instead of one config map for
the configuration server
- Create secrets for credentials to the resource managers and a secret for the TLS
certificate used by the ingress instead of creating secrets for the credentials to
the configuration server
- Create one ingress instead of using Spring Cloud Gateway

To simplify the deployment, deploy scripts for the development and
production environments have been added to the source code. Let's go through the deploy
script for the development environment that we will use in this section.

## Walking through the deploy script
The ***kubernetes/scripts/deploy-dev-env.bash*** script, contains the necessary
commands for performing the deployment. The script will perform the following steps:

  1. It will create config maps, one per microservice. For example, for the product
  microservice, we have the following:
  ```bash
  kubectl create configmap config-repo-product  --from-file=config-repo/application.yml --from-file=config-repo/product.yml --save-config
  ```
  2. Then, it will create the required secrets. For example, credentials for accessing
  RabbitMQ are created with the following command:
  ```bash
  kubectl create secret generic rabbitmq-credentials \
      --from-literal=SPRING_RABBITMQ_USERNAME=rabbit-user-dev \
      --from-literal=SPRING_RABBITMQ_PASSWORD=rabbit-pwd-dev \
      --save-config
  ```
  3. Secrets are also created for the resource managers; their names are suffixed
  with ***server-credentials***. They are used in the Kubernetes definitions files in
  the ***kubernetes/services/overlays/dev*** folder. For example, credentials
  used by RabbitMQ are created with the following command:
  ```bash
  kubectl create secret generic rabbitmq-server-credentials \
      --from-literal=RABBITMQ_DEFAULT_USER=rabbit-user-dev \
      --from-literal=RABBITMQ_DEFAULT_PASS=rabbit-pwd-dev \
      --save-config
  ```
  4. The secret that contains the TLS certificate for the ingress, ***tls-certificate***, is
  based on the already existing self-signed certificate in
  the ***kubernetes/cert*** folder. It is created with the following command:
  ```bash
  kubectl create secret tls tls-certificate --key   kubernetes/cert/tls.key --cert kubernetes/cert/tls.crt
  ```
  - The self-signed certificate has been created with the following command:
    ```
    openssl req -x509 -sha256 -nodes -days 365 -newkey   rsa:2048 -keyout kubernetes/cert/tls.key -out   kubernetes/cert/tls.crt -subj   "/CN=minikube.me/O=minikube.me"
    ```
  5. Deploy the microservices for the development environment, based on
  the ***dev*** overlay, using the ***-k*** switch to activate Kustomize:
  ```
  kubectl apply -k kubernetes/services/overlays/dev
  ```
  6. Wait for the deployment and its pods to be up and running:
  ```
  kubectl wait --timeout=600s --for=condition=ready pod --all
  ```

After this walkthrough, we are ready to run the commands required for deploying and testing!
## Running commands for deploying and testing
Before we can perform the deployment, we need to make the following preparations:
- Map the DNS name used by the ingress, ***minikube.me***, to the IP address of the
Minikube instance
- Build Docker images from source
- Create a namespace in Kubernetes

Run the following commands to prepare, deploy, and test:
1. Map ***minikube.me*** to the IP address of the Minikube instance by adding a line to
the file ***/etc/hosts*** with the following command:
```
sudo bash -c "echo $(minikube ip) minikube.me | tee -a /etc/hosts"
```
Verify the result with the ***cat /etc/hosts*** command. Expect a line that contains
the IP address of your Minikube instance followed by ***minikube.me*** as shown in
the following screenshot:
```
$ cat /etc/hosts
...
192.168.99.121   minikube.me
```
If os is windows ,the file is C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts.
use administrative Powershell with the following command:
```
Add-Content -Path $env:windir\System32\drivers\etc\hosts -Value "`n$(minikube -p handson-spring-boot-cloud ip)`tminikube.me" -Force
```
2. Build Docker images from source with the following commands:
```bash
cd $BOOK_HOME/Chapter17
eval $(minikube docker-env)
./gradlew build && docker-compose build
```
3. Recreate the namespace, hands-on, and set it as the default namespace:
```bash
kubectl delete namespace hands-on
kubectl create namespace hands-on
kubectl config set-context $(kubectl config current-context) --namespace=hands-on
```
4. Execute the deployment by running the script with the following command:
```bash
./kubernetes/scripts/deploy-dev-env.bash
```
5. Once the deployment is complete, start the tests with the following command:
```
HOST=minikube.me PORT=443 ./test-em-all.bash
```
Expect the normal output that we have seen from the previous chapters as shown
in the following screenshot:
```
```
6. You can try out the APIs manually by performing the same steps as in the earlier
chapters: just replace the host and port with minikube.me. Get an OAuth/OIDC
access token and use it to call an API with the following commands:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl -k https://writer:secret@minikube.me/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .access_token -r)

curl -ks https://minikube.me/product-composite/2 -H "Authorization:Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" | jq .productId
```
Expect the requested product ID, 2, in the response.

- The deployment we have set up in this section is based on an environment aimed at developing and testing. If you want to set up an environment
aimed at staging and production, such as the one described in ***Chapter 16, Deploying Our Microservices to Kubernetes***, refer to the ***Deploying to
Kubernetes for staging and production*** section. For this, you can use the ***./kubernetes/scripts/deploy-prod-env.bash*** script. Use it in step 4 as previously outlined instead of the ***deploy-dev-env.bash*** script.

- Note that the ***deploy-prod-env.bash*** script will launch the three resource managers for MySQL, MongoDB, and RabbitMQ using Docker Compose; that is, they will run as Docker containers outside Kubernetes (in the same way as in Chapter 16, Deploying Our Microservices to Kubernetes).

This deployment uses a self-signed certificate that was exposed by the Kubernetes ingress
and that requires manual provisioning. Manual handling of certificates is both timeconsuming
and error-prone. It is, for example, very easy to forget to renew a certificate in
time. In the next section, we will learn how to use the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt to
automate this provisioning process!
