# Automating the provision of certificates
<!-- MarkdownTOC -->
- [Automating the provision of certificates](#automating-the-provision-of-certificates)
    - [Deploying the Cert Manager and defining Let's Encrypt issuers](#deploying-the-cert-manager-and-defining-lets-encrypt-issuers)
    - [Creating an HTTP tunnel using ngrok](#creating-an-http-tunnel-using-ngrok)
    - [Provisioning certificates with the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt](#provisioning-certificates-with-the-cert-manager-and-lets-encrypt)
       - [Using Let's Encrypt's staging environment](#using-lets-encrypts-staging-environment)
       - [Using Let's Encrypt's production environment](#using-lets-encrypts-production-environment)
    - [Cleaning up](#cleaning-up)
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, we will use the Cert Manager to automate the provision of certificates used by the external HTTPS endpoint exposed by the ingress. The Cert Manager will run as an add-on in Kubernetes and will be configured to request the issuing of certificates from Let's Encrypt with a free Certificate Authority that can be used to automate the issuing of certificates. 

To be able to verify that we own the DNS name that the certificate shall be issued for, Let's Encrypt requires access to the endpoint we want to issue the certificate for. Since our Kubernetes cluster runs locally in Minikube, we must make it possible for Let's Encrypt to access our cluster during the provisioning. 

We will use the ngrok tool to create a temporary HTTP tunnel from the internet to our local Kubernetes cluster to be used by Let's Encrypt.

For more information on each product, see the following:

- Cert Manager: http://docs.cert-manager.io/en/latest/index.html
- Let's Encrypt: https://letsencrypt.org/docs/
- ngrok: https://ngrok.com/docs
 
All this together might seem a bit overwhelming, so let's take it step by step:

1. Deploy the Cert Manager and define issuers in Kubernetes based on Let's Encrypt.
2. Create an HTTP tunnel using ngrok.
3. Provision certificates with the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt.
4. Verify that we got certificates from Let's Encrypt.
5. Clean up.

- The HTTP tunnel is only required if your Kubernetes cluster isn't reachable on the internet. If its ingress resource can be accessed directly from the internet, the use of ngrok can be skipped.
## Deploying the Cert Manager and defining Let's Encrypt issuers
To deploy the Cert Manager, we can execute a single Kubernetes definition file that will create a namespace, cert-manager, and then deploy the Cert Manager into the namespace. We will install version 1.3.0, the latest available version when writing this chapter. Run the following command:

```
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/jetstack/cert-manager/releases/download/v1.3.0/cert-manager.yaml
```

If you get an error message such as ***unable to recognize "https://github.com/jetstack/cert-manager/releases/download/v1.3.0/cert-manager.yaml": no matches for kind "Issuer" in version "certmanager.k8s.io/v1alpha1***", then simply rerun the command again.

Wait for the deployment and its pods to be available:
```
kubectl wait --timeout=600s --for=condition=ready pod --all -n cert-manager
```
Expect output similar to the following from the command:
```
$ kubectl wait --timeout=600s --for=condition=ready pod --all -n cert-manager
pod/cert-manager-76b7c557d5-lqgvt condition met
pod/cert-manager-cainjector-655d695d74-hg5ww condition met
pod/cert-manager-webhook-78bd968fbf-8rjnl condition met
```
With the Cert Manager in place, we can define issuers in Kubernetes that are based on Let's Encrypt.

Let's Encrypt exposes the following issuers:

- ***Staging environment***, to be used during development and test phases where it
    can be expected that a lot of short-lived certificates are requested. The staging
    environment allows for the creation of many certificates but the root ***CA*** (short
    for ***Certificate Authority***) in the certificate is not trusted. This means that
    certificates from the staging environment can't be used to protect web pages or
    APIs used by a web browser. A web browser won't trust its root CA and will
    complain when a user opens a web page protected by certificates from the
    staging environment.
- ***Production environment***, it uses a trusted root CA to issue certificates. It can,
    therefore, be used to issue certificates that are trusted by web browsers. The
    production environment limits the number of certificates that can be issued. For
    example, only 50 new certificates per week can be issued per registered domain,
    for instance, in case ***ngrok.io***.


We will register two issuers in Kubernetes, one for the staging environment and one for the
production environment. Issuers can be registered either globally in the cluster or locally in
a namespace. To keep things together, we will use namespace local issuers.

Communication between the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt during the provision of
certificates is based on a standard protocol, ***Automated Certificate Management***
***Environment v2***, or ***ACME v2*** for short. Let's Encrypt will act as a CA and the Cert
Manager will act as an ACME client. To validate the ownership of a DNS name, the ACME
protocol specifies two types of challenge that a CA can use:
- ***http-01***: The CA asks the ACME client for a randomly named file to be made
    available under the following
    URL: http://<domainname>/.well-known/acme-challenge/<randomfilename>. If the CA succeeds in accessing the file using this URL, the ownership of the domain is validated.
- ***dns-01***: The CA asks the ACME client for a specified value to be placed in a TXT record, ***_acme-challenge.<YOUR_DOMAIN>***, under the domain in the DNS server. This is typically achieved by using an API of the DNS provider. If the CA succeeds in accessing the specified content in the TXT record in the DNS server,the ownership of the domain is validated.
    
Automating a ***dns-01*** based challenge is harder to achieve than automating an
***http-01*** challenge in most cases; however, it is preferred, for example, if the HTTP
endpoint isn't available on the internet. A ***dns-01*** challenge also supports issuing wildcard
certificates, which an ***http-01*** challenge can't be used for. In this chapter, we will configure
the Cert Manager to use an ***http-01***—based challenge.

The definition of the issuer for the Let's Encrypt staging environment looks like the following:

Chapter17\kubernetes\services\base\letsencrypt-issuer-staging.yaml
```Chapter17\kubernetes\services\base\letsencrypt-issuer-staging.yaml
apiVersion: certmanager.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: Issuer
metadata:
  name: letsencrypt-issuer-staging
spec:
  acme:
    email: <your email address>
    server: https://acme-staging-v02.api.letsencrypt.org/directory
    privateKeySecretRef:
      name: letsencrypt-issuer-staging-account-key
    solvers:
    - http01:
        ingress:
          class: nginx
```
migration info:
https://github.com/jetstack/cert-manager/releases/tag/v0.11.0

The following explains the preceding source code:
- The ***name*** of the issuer, ***letsencrypt-issuer-staging***, will be used in the
    ingress when referring to the issuer to be used when provisioning certificates for
    the ingress.
- The ***email*** must be filled in with your email address. Let's Encrypt will use the
    email address to contact you about expiring certificates and issues, if any, related
    to your account.
- The ***server*** field points out the URL for the Let's Encrypt staging environment.
- The ***privateKeySecretRef*** field contains the name of a secret. This secret will
    be created by the Cert Manager and will contain an ACME/Let's Encrypt
    ***account private key***. This key identifies you (or your company) as a user of
    the ACME service, that is, Let's Encrypt. It is used to sign requests sent to Let's
    Encrypt to validate your identity.
- The ***solver*** definition declares that an ***http-01*** challenge shall be used to verify
    the ownership of the domain name.

The definition of the issuer for the Let's Encrypt production environment looks the same,
the major difference is the ACME server URL used: ***https://acme-v02.api.letsencrypt.org/directory***.

Edit the following files and replace ***<your email address>*** with your email address:
    
- kubernetes/services/base/letsencrypt-issuer-staging.yaml
- kubernetes/services/base/letsencrypt-issuer-prod.yaml

Apply the definitions with the following commands:
```bash
kubectl apply -f kubernetes/services/base/letsencrypt-issuer-staging.yaml
kubectl apply -f kubernetes/services/base/letsencrypt-issuer-prod.yaml
```
We now have the Cert Manager in place and have registered issuers for the Let's Encrypt staging and production environment. The next step is to create an HTTP tunnel using ***ngrok***.

## Creating an HTTP tunnel using ngrok
The free subscription to ngrok can be used to create an HTTP tunnel where ngrok
terminates the HTTPS traffic using its own wildcard certificate for *.ngrok.io, that is,
before the HTTP requests reach the ingress resource in Kubernetes. The client that sends the
HTTPS request will only see the ngrok certificate and not the certificate exposed by the
ingress resource in Kubernetes. This means that we can't use the HTTP tunnel to test a
certificate that has been issued by Let's Encrypt and is used by the ingress resource in
Kubernetes.

But the HTTP tunnel can be used during the provisioning phase where Let's Encrypt needs
to verify that the ACME client owns the DNS name it is requested to issue a certificate for.
The DNS name will be the hostname that ngrok assigns to the HTTP tunnel, for
example, a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io. Once the provisioning is performed, we can shut down the
HTTP tunnel and redirect the hostname to the IP address of the Minikube instance (using
the local /etc/hosts file). 

- For paying customers, ngrok provides a TLS tunnel that passes through
HTTPS traffic instead of terminating it; that is, a client that sends an
HTTPS request will be able to see and verify the certificate exposed by the
ingress resource in Kubernetes. Using a TLS tunnel instead of the HTTP
tunnel should make this extra step unnecessary.

Perform the following steps to create the HTTP tunnel:
1. Create the HTTP tunnel with the following command:
```
ngrok http https://minikube.me:443
```
2. Expect output similar to the following screenshot:(windows need to in cmd or powershell)
```
ngrok by @inconshreveable                                              (Ctrl+C to quit)
Session Status                online                                                   
Account                       robert0714@gmail.com (Plan: Free)                        
Version                       2.3.38                                                   
Region                        United States (us)                                       
Web Interface                 http://127.0.0.1:4040                                    
Forwarding                    http://a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io -> https://minikube.me:443  
Forwarding                    https://a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io -> https://minikube.me:443                                                                                        Connections                   ttl     opn     rt1     rt5     p50     p90                                            
                              0       0       0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00             
```
3. Pick up the hostname for the HTTP tunnel, ***a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io*** in the
preceding example, and save it in an environment variable such as the following:
```
NGROK_HOST=a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io
```
With the HTTP tunnel in place, we can prepare the definition of the ingress resource for
automatic provisioning of its certificate using the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt!

## Provisioning certificates with the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt
Before configuring the ingress resource, it might be good to have a high level
understanding of how the provisioning is performed. The automated provisioning of a
certificate using the Cert Manager and Let's Encrypt looks like the following:

The following steps will be taken during the provisioning:
    1. An ingress is created annotated with ***certmanager.k8s.io/issuer: "name of a Let's Encrypt issuer"***.
    2. This annotation will trigger the Cert Manager to start to provide a certificate for the ingress using Let's Encrypt.
    3. During the provisioning process, Let's Encrypt will perform an ***http-01*** challenge and use the HTTP tunnel to verify that the Cert Manager owns the DNS name.
    4. Once the provisioning is complete, the Cert Manager will store the certificate in Kubernetes and create a secret with the name specified by the ingress.
We will add a new ingress, ***edge-ngrok***, defined in the ***ingress-edge-serverngrok.yml*** file, which will route requests to the hostname of the HTTP tunnel. This ingress
will have the same routing rules as the existing ingress. The part that differs looks like the following:

(Chapter17\kubernetes\services\base\ingress-edge-server-ngrok.yml)
```
apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: edge-ngrok
  annotations:
    certmanager.k8s.io/issuer: "letsencrypt-issuer-staging"
spec:
  tls:
  - hosts:
    - xxxxxxxx.ngrok.io
    secretName: tls-ngrok-letsencrypt-certificate
  rules:
  - host: xxxxxxxx.ngrok.io
```
Here is an explanation for the preceding source code:
- Using the ***certmanager.k8s.io/issuer: "letsencrypt-issuer-staging"***
    annotation, we ask the Cert Manager to provision a certificate for this
    ingress using the issuer named ***letsencrypt-issuer-staging***.
- The ***xxxxxxxx.ngrok.io*** hostname in the ***tls*** and ***rules*** declarations must be
    replaced with the actual hostname of your HTTP tunnel.
- The secret with the name ***tls-ngrok-letsencrypt-certificate*** is where the
    certificate will be stored once the provisioning is complete.

With this high level of understanding of the provisioning process and an ingress resource
prepared for using it in place, we can start to provision certificates using the two
environments that Let's Encrypt supports. Let's start with the staging environment, suitable
for development and test activities.

### Using Let's Encrypt's staging environment

Perform the following steps to provision a certificate from Let's Encrypt staging environment and verify that it works:

1. Edit the ***kubernetes/services/base/ingress-edge-server-ngrok.yml*** file and replace ***xxxxxxxx.ngrok.io*** with the hostname of your HTTP tunnel in two places!
(a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io in the preceding example.)

2. Before starting up the provisioning, run a watch command in a separate Terminal window to monitor the provisioning of the certificate. Run the following command:
```
kubectl get cert --watch
```
3. Initiate the provisioning by applying the new ingress definition with the following command:
```
kubectl apply -f kubernetes/services/base/ingress-edge-server-ngrok.yml
```
4. The Cert Manager will now detect the new ingress and start to provide a certificate with Let's Encrypt staging environment as the issuer using the ACME v2 protocol via the HTTP tunnel set up by ***ngrok***.
5. After a while, you should notice the ***http-01*** challenge in the Terminal window where the HTTP tunnel runs. Expect a request like the following in the output:
```
```
6. A ***tls-ngrok-letsencrypt-certificate*** certificate will be created and it will be stored in the ***tls-ngrok-letsencrypt-certificate*** secret, as specified in the ingress. Expect output from the ***kubectl get cert --watch*** command similar to the following:
```
```
7.After a while the ***READY*** state of the certificate will be changed to ***True***, meaning that the certificate is provisioned and we are ready to try it out!

8. To try out the certificate provisioned by Let's Encrypt, we need to redirect the ***ngrok*** hostname to point directly to the Minikube IP address. We will add the
hostname of the HTTP tunnel to the ***/etc/hosts*** file resolved to the IP address of the Minikube instance. This will result in local requests sent to the hostname of
the HTTP tunnel being directed to the Minikube instance as illustrated by the following diagram:

9. Edit the ***/etc/hosts*** file and add the hostname of your HTTP tunnel after minikube.me in the line we added earlier in the chapter. After the edit, the line should look similar to the following:
```
```
10. Use the keytool command to see what certificate the hostname of the HTTP tunnel exposes:
```
keytool -printcert -sslserver $NGROK_HOST:443 | grep -E "Owner:|Issuer:"
```
11. Expect a response such as the following:
```
$ keytool -printcert -sslserver $NGROK_HOST:443 | grep -E "Owner:|Issuer:"
Owner: CN=Kubernetes Ingress Controller Fake Certificate, O=Acme Co
Issuer: CN=Kubernetes Ingress Controller Fake Certificate, O=Acme Co

```
- If your keytool is localized, that is, it prints its output in another
language rather than English, you will need to change the ***Owner:|Issuer***: string used by the preceding grep command, to the
localized version.
12. The certificate is issued for the hostname of the HTTP tunnel
(***a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io*** in the preceding example) and it is issued by ***Fake LE Intermediate X1*** using ***Fake LE Root X1*** as its Root CA. This verifies that
the ingress uses the Let's Encrypt staging certificate!
13. Wrap up by running the ***test-em-all.bash*** test script using the same command:
```bash
HOST=$NGROK_HOST PORT=443 ./test-em-all.bash
```

Expect the usual output from the test script; check that it concludes with the following:
```bash
$ HOST=$NGROK_HOST PORT=443 ./test-em-all.bash
Start Tests: Wed Apr 14 18:22:19 TST 2021
HOST=a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io
PORT=443
Wait for: curl -k https://a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io:443/actuator/health... DONE, continues...

End, all tests OK: Wed Apr 14 18:22:58 TST 2021
```

Certificates provisioned by Let's Encrypt staging environment are, as mentioned
previously, good for development and test activities. But since its root CA is not trusted by
web browsers, they can't be used in production scenarios. Let's also try out Let's Encrypt's
production environment, which is capable of provisioning trusted certificates, albeit in
limited numbers.

### Using Let's Encrypt's production environment

To provision a certificate from Let's Encrypt production environment, instead of the staging
environment, we have to change the issuer in the ingress definition and then apply the
updated definition. Perform the following steps:
1. Edit the kubernetes/services/base/ingress-edge-server-ngrok.yml file and change the following code:
    ```bash
    certmanager.k8s.io/issuer: "letsencrypt-issuer-staging"
    ```
    The preceding code should now be as follows:
    ```bash
    certmanager.k8s.io/issuer: "letsencrypt-issuer-prod"
    ```
2. Apply the change by running the following command:
    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f kubernetes/services/base/ingress-edge-server-ngrok.yml
    ```
3. Monitor the output from the kubectl get cert --watch command and wait for the new certificate to be provisioned. Its ready state will change to False immediately after the apply command, and after a short while it will go back to True. This means that the Cert Manager has provisioned a certificate issued by Let's Encrypt production environment!

4. Check the certificate with the following keytool command:
    ```bash
    keytool -printcert -sslserver $NGROK_HOST:443 | grep -E    "Owner:|Issuer:"
    ```
    Expect output such as the following:
    ```bash
    ```
5. The new certificate is like the one previously issued for the hostname of the
    HTTP tunnel (a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io in the preceding example), but this time the
    issuer and Root CA are from the production environment. This means that the
    certificate should be trusted by a web browser.

6. Open the https://a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io/actuator/health URL(replace a912b3bcb51b.ngrok.io with the hostname of your HTTP tunnel) in a local web browser. If you use Google Chrome and click on the certificate icon (the padlock in front of the URL) you should see something like the following output:
  
    As seen in the preceding screenshot Chrome reports: This certificate is valid!

7. Wrap up by verifying that the test-em-all.bash test script also works with this certificate as follows:

    ```bash
    HOST=$NGROK_HOST PORT=443 ./test-em-all.bash
    ```
    Expect the usual output from the test script; check that it concludes with the following output:
    ```bash
    End, all tests OK: Wed Apr 14 17:22:58 TST 2021
    ```
You can switch back to the staging issuer by following the same procedure but also change back to the staging issuer in the ingress definition.

## Cleaning up

When you are done, clean up the resources created in Kubernetes (and optionally in Docker) using Docker Compose by running the following commands:
1. Stop the kubectl get cert --watch command with Ctrl + C.
2. Stop the HTTP tunnel with Ctrl + C.
3. Delete the namespace in Kubernetes with the following command:
    ```
    kubectl delete namespace hands-on
    ```
4. If you tried out the production environment deployment using the ***./kubernetes/scripts/deploy-prod-env.bash*** script, you also need to stop the resource managers that were launched as Docker containers using Docker Compose. Run the following command to stop them:
    ```bash
    docker-compose down mongodb mysql rabbitmq
    ```
    
Now that we are done automating the certificates to provision them, let's see how to verify that microservices work without Kubernetes. Let's see how this is done.
