# Securing the system landscape
To secure the system landscape as described in the introduction to this chapter, we will
perform the following steps:
- Encrypt external requests and responses to and from our external API using
HTTPS to protect against eavesdropping
- Authenticate and authorize users and client applications that access our APIs
using OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect
- Secure access to the discovery service, Netflix Eureka, using HTTP basic
authentication

We will only apply HTTPS for external communication to our edge server, using plain
HTTP for communication inside our system landscape.

For test purposes, we will add a local OAuth 2.0 authorization server to our system
landscape. All external communication with the authorization server will be routed
through the edge server. The edge server and the product-composite service will act as
OAuth 2.0 resource servers; that is, they will require a valid OAuth 2.0 access token to
allow access.

To minimize the overhead of validating access tokens, we will assume that they are
encoded as signed JWT tokens and that the authorization server exposes an endpoint that
the resource servers can use to access the public keys, also known as ***jwk-set***, required to
validate the signing.

The system landscape will look like the following:

From the preceding diagram, we can note that:
1. HTTPS is used for external communication, while plain text HTTP is used inside the system landscape.
2. The local OAuth 2.0 authorization server will be accessed externally through the edge server.
3. Both the edge server and the product composite microservice will validate access tokens as signed JWT tokens.
4. The edge server and the product composite microservice will get
the authorization server's public keys from its ***jwk-set*** endpoint, and use them
to validate the signature of the JWT-based access tokens.


With this overview of how the system landscape will be secured, let's start by adding a
local authorization server to the system landscape.
