# Adding an authorization server to our system landscape

To be able to run tests locally and fully automated with APIs that are secured using OAuth
2.0 and OpenID Connect, we will add an OAuth 2.0-based authorization server to our
system landscape. Spring Security 5.1 does not, unfortunately, provide an
authorization server out of the box. But there is a legacy project (currently in maintenance
mode), Spring Security OAuth, that provides an authorization server that we can use.

In fact, in the samples provided by Spring Security 5.1, a project using the authorization
server from Spring Security OAuth is available. It is configured to use JWT-encoded access
tokens, and it also exposes an endpoint for a JSON Web Key Set (JWKS) (part of the
OpenID Connect Discovery standard), a set of keys containing the public keys that can be
used by resource servers to verify JWT tokens issued by the authorization server.

So, even if it isn't a full-blown OpenID Connect provider, it is suitable for use together with
tests that we want to be able to run locally and in a fully automated manner.

- For more details on planned support for OAuth 2.0 in Spring Security,
refer to https://spring.io/blog/2018/01/30/next-generation-oauth-2-0-support-with-spring-security.
- The authorization server in the Spring Security sample projects is
available here: https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-security/tree/master/samples/boot/oauth2authorizationserver.

The Spring Security sample project configures two OAuth clients, ***reader*** and ***writer***,
where the ***reader*** client is granted a read scope, and the ***writer*** client is granted both a
read and a write scope. Both clients are configured to have the secret set to ***secret***; refer to
the ***configure()*** method in the ***sample.AuthorizationServerConfiguration*** class.

The following changes have been applied to the sample project:

  - A Eureka client has been added in the same way as for the other microservices.See Chapter 9, Adding Service Discovery Using Netflix Eureka and Ribbon; refer to
  the Connecting microservices to a Netflix Eureka server section.
  - Spring Boot Actuator has been added to get access to the health endpoint.
  - A Dockerfile has been added to be able to run the authorization server as a Docker container. 
  - The Gradle build file, spring-security-samples-bootoauth2authorizationserver.gradle, has been changed to become more like the build.gradle files used in the source code of this book.
  -The configuration in the sample/AuthorizationServerConfiguration class has been changed as follows:
    - Support has been added for the grant types: ***code, authorization_code, and implicit***  .
    - The names of the scopes, ***message:read*** and ***message:write*** , have been changed to ***product:read*** and product:write.
    - The username of the user registered in the authorization server has been changed to magnus, with the password password; refer to the ***userDetailsService()*** method in the ***UserConfig*** class (found in the ***sample/AuthorizationServerConfiguration.java*** file).

The source code for the authorization server is available in ***$BOOK_HOME/Chapter11/spring-cloud/authorization-server***.

To incorporate the authorization server in the system landscape, a number of changes have been applied. The authorization server has been added to the following:
- The common build file, ***settings.gradle***
- The three Docker Compose files, ***docker-compose*.yml***
- The edge server, ***spring-cloud/gateway***:
  - A health check has been added to ***HealthCheckConfiguration***.
  - A route for URIs starting with ***/oauth/*** has been added.

With an understanding of how a local authorization server is added to the system landscape, let's move on and see how we can protect external communication from eavesdropping using HTTPS.
