# Protecting external communication with HTTPS

In this section, we will learn how to prevent eavesdropping on external communication, for
example from the internet, via the public APIs exposed by the edge server. We will use
HTTPS to encrypt communication. To use HTTPS, we need to do the following:

- ***Create a certificate***: We will create our own self-signed certificate, sufficient for development purposes.
- ***Configure the edge server***: It has to be configured to accept only HTTPS-based external traffic using the certificate.

The self-signed certificate is created with the following command:
```
keytool -genkeypair -alias localhost -keyalg RSA -keysize 2048 -storetype PKCS12 -keystore edge.p12 -validity 3650
```
- The source code comes with a sample certificate file, so you don't need to
run this command to run the following examples.

The command will ask for a number of parameters. When asked for a password, I entered ***password***. For the rest of the parameters, I simply entered an empty value to
accept the default value. The certificate file created, ***edge.p12***, is placed in the ***gateway*** projects folder, ***src/main/resources/keystore***. This means that the certificate file will
be placed in the .jar file when it is built and will be available on the classpath in runtime
at: ***keystore/edge.p12***.

- Providing certificates using the classpath is sufficient during
development, but not applicable to other environments, for example, a
production environment. The following shows how we can replace this
certificate with an external certificate at runtime!

To configure the edge server to use the certificate and HTTPS, the following is added to ***application.yml*** in the ***gateway*** project:
```yaml
server.port: 8443

spring.application.name: gateway

server.ssl:
  key-store-type: PKCS12
  key-store: classpath:keystore/edge.p12
  key-store-password: password
  key-alias: localhost
```

The following are the explanations for the preceding source code:
- The path to the certificate is specified in the ***server.ssl.key-store*** parameter, and is set to the ***classpath:keystore/edge.p12*** value. This means that the certificate will be picked up on the classpath from the location,***keystore/edge.p12*** .
- The password for the certificate is specified in the ***server.ssl.key-storepassword parameter.
- To indicate that the edge server talks HTTPS and not HTTP, we also change the port from ***8080*** to ***8443*** in the ***server.port*** parameter.

In addition to these changes in the edge server, changes are also required in the following
files to reflect the changes to the port and HTTP protocol:
The three Docker Compose files, docker-compose*.yml
The test script, test-em-all.bash
Providing certificates using the classpath is as already mentioned previously only sufficient
during development; let's see how we can replace this certificate with an external certificate
in runtime!

## Replacing a self-signed certificate in runtime

Placing a self-signed certificate in the ***.jar*** file is only useful for development. For a working solution in runtime environments, for example, for test or production, it must be possible to use certificates signed by authorized ***CAs*** (short for ***Certificate Authorities***).

It must also be possible to specify the certificates to be used during runtime without the
need to rebuild the ***.jar*** files and, when using Docker, the Docker image that contains the
***.jar*** file. When using Docker Compose to manage the Docker container, we can map a
volume in the Docker container to a certificate that resides on the Docker host. We can also
set up environment variables for the Docker container that points to the new certificate in
the Docker volume.

- In Chapter 15, Introduction to Kubernetes, we will learn about Kubernetes,
where we will see more powerful solutions for how to handle secrets,
such as certificates, that are suitable for running Docker containers in a
cluster; that is, where containers are scheduled on a group of Docker hosts
and not on a single Docker host.
- The changes described in this topic have not been applied to the source
code in the book's GitHub repository; that is, you need to make them
yourself to see them in action!

To replace the certificate packaged in the .jar file, perform the following steps:

1. Create a second certificate and set the password to testtest, when asked for it:
```
cd $BOOK_HOME/Chapter11
mkdir keystore
keytool -genkeypair -alias localhost -keyalg RSA -keysize 2048 -storetype PKCS12 -keystore keystore/edge-test.p12 -validity 3650
```
2. Update the Docker Compose file, ***docker-compose.yml***, with environment variables for the location and password for the new certificate and a volume that maps to the folder where the new certificate is placed. The configuration of the
edge server will look like the following after the change:
```yml
gateway:
  environment:
    - SPRING_PROFILES_ACTIVE=docker
    - SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE=file:/keystore/edge-test.p12
    - SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD=testtest
volumes:
  - $PWD/keystore:/keystore
build: spring-cloud/gateway
mem_limit: 350m
ports:
  - "8443:8443"
```

3. If the edge server is up and running, it needs to be restarted with the following commands:
```
docker-compose up -d --scale gateway=0
docker-compose up -d --scale gateway=1
```

- The ***docker-compose restart gateway*** command might look like a good candidate for restarting the ***gateway*** service, but it actually does not take changes in ***docker-compose.yml*** into consideration. Hence, it is not
a useful command in this case.

The new certificate is now in use!

This concludes the section on how to protect external communication with HTTPS. In the next section we will learn how to secure access to the discovery service, Netflix Eureka,
using HTTP basic authentication.
