<!-- MarkdownTOC -->
- [Securing access to the discovery service,Netflix Eureka](#securing-access-to-the-discovery-servicenetflix-eureka)
    - [Changes in the Eureka server](#changes-in-the-eureka-server)
    - [Changes in Eureka clients](#changes-in-eureka-clients)
    - [Testing the protected Eureka server](#testing-the-protected-eureka-server)
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->

# Securing access to the discovery service,Netflix Eureka

Previously, we learned to protect external communication with HTTPS. Now we will use
HTTP basic authentication to restrict access to the APIs and web pages on the discovery
server, Netflix Eureka; that is, we will require a user to supply a username and password to
get access. Changes are required both on the Eureka server and in the Eureka clients
described as follows.

## Changes in the Eureka server

To protect the Eureka servers, the following changes have been applied:

1. A dependency in build.gradle has been added to Spring Security:
```gradle
implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-security'
```

2. Security configuration has been added to the ***se.magnus.springcloud.eurekaserver.SecurityConfig*** class:
    - The user is defined as follows:
    ```java
    public void configure(AuthenticationManagerBuilder auth) throws
    Exception {
      auth.inMemoryAuthentication()
        .passwordEncoder(NoOpPasswordEncoder.getInstance())
        .withUser(username).password(password)
        .authorities("USER");
    }
    ```
    - The ***username*** and ***password*** are injected into the constructor from the configuration file:
    ```java
    @Autowired
    public SecurityConfig(
      @Value("${app.eureka-username}") String username,
      @Value("${app.eureka-password}") String password
    ) {
      this.username = username;
      this.password = password;
    }
    ```
    - All APIs and web pages are protected using HTTP basic authentication by
    means of the following definition:
    ```java
    protected void configure(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
      http
        .authorizeRequests()
        .anyRequest().authenticated()
        .and()
        .httpBasic();
    }
    ```
3. Credentials for the user are set up in the configuration file, application.yml:
```yaml
app:
eureka-username: u
eureka-password: p
```
4.Finally, the test class, ***se.magnus.springcloud.eurekaserver.EurekaServerApplicationTests***, uses the credentials from the configuration file when testing the APIs of the
Eureka server:
```java
@Value("${app.eureka-username}")
private String username;

@Value("${app.eureka-password}")
private String password;

@Autowired
public void setTestRestTemplate(TestRestTemplate testRestTemplate)
{
  this.testRestTemplate = testRestTemplate.withBasicAuth(username,password);
}
```
The preceding are the steps required for restricting access to the APIs and web pages of the
discovery server, Netflix Eureka. It will now use HTTP basic authentication and require a
user to supply a username and password to get access. In the next section, we will learn
how to configure Netflix Eureka clients so that they pass credentials when accessing
the Netflix Eureka server.

## Changes in Eureka clients
For Eureka clients, the credentials have to be specified in the connection URL for the Eureka
server. This is specified in each client's configuration file, application.yml, as follows:
```yaml
app:
  eureka-username: u
  eureka-password: p
  eureka-server: localhost

eureka:
  client:
    serviceUrl:
      defaultZone: "http://${app.eureka-username}:${app.eureka-password}@${app.eureka-server}:8761/eureka/"
```

We will see this configuration in use by Netflix Eureka clients when we test the secured
system landscape in the ***Testing with the local authorization server*** section.

In the next section, we will learn how to add credentials when we manually access the
Netflix Eureka server, either using its API or its Web pages.

## Testing the protected Eureka server
Once the protected Eureka server is up and running, we have to supply valid credentials to be able to access its APIs and web pages.

For example, asking the Eureka server for registered instances can be done by means of the following curl command:
```bash
curl -H "accept:application/json" https://u:p@localhost:8443/eureka/api/apps -ks | jq -r .applications.application[].instance[].instanceId
```
A sample response is as follows:


When accessing the web page on ***https://localhost:8443/eureka/web***, we first have to accept an insecure connection, since our certificate is self-signed, and next we have to supply valid credentials, as specified in the preceding configuration files:

Following a successful login, we will see the familiar web page from the Eureka server:

This concludes the section on how to restrict access to the Netflix Eureka server. In the next section we will learn how to use OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect to authenticate and authorize access to APIs.
