
<!-- MarkdownTOC -->
- [Authenticating and authorizing API access using OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect](#authenticating-and-authorizing-api-access-using-oauth-20-and-openid-connect)
    - [Changes in both the edge server and the productcomposite service](#changes-in-both-the-edge-server-and-the-productcomposite-service)
    - [Changes in the product-composite service](#changes-in-the-product-composite-service)
    - [Changes in the test script](#changes-in-the-test-script)
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->
# Authenticating and authorizing API access using OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect

With the authorization server in place, we can enhance the edge server and the ***product-composite***
service so they become OAuth 2.0 resource servers; that is, they require a valid
access token to allow access. We will configure the edge server to accept any access token it
can validate using the signature provided by the authorization server. The ***product-composite***
service will also require the access token to contain some OAuth 2.0 scopes:

- The ***product:read*** scope will be required for accessing the read-only APIs.
- The ***product:write*** scope will be required for accessing the create and delete APIs.

We also need to enhance our test script, ***test-em-all.bash***, so that it acquires access tokens before it runs the tests.

## Changes in both the edge server and the productcomposite service

The following changes have been applied:
- Spring Security 5.1 dependencies have been added to build.gradle to support OAuth 2.0 resource servers:
```gradle
implementation('org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-startersecurity')
implementation('org.springframework.security:spring-securityoauth2-resource-server')
implementation('org.springframework.security:spring-securityoauth2-jose')
```
- Security configurations have been added to the ***se.magnus.springcloud.gateway.SecurityConfig*** and ***se.magnus.microservices.composite.product.SecurityConfig*** classes:
```java
@EnableWebFluxSecurity
public class SecurityConfig {
  @Bean
  SecurityWebFilterChain  springSecurityFilterChain(ServerHttpSecurity http) {
    http
      .authorizeExchange()
        .pathMatchers("/actuator/**").permitAll()
        .anyExchange().authenticated()
        .and()
      .oauth2ResourceServer()
        .jwt();
    return http.build();
  }
}
```

Explanations for the preceding source code are as follows:

  - ***.pathMatchers("/actuator/\*\*").permitAll()*** is used to allow access to
  URLs that should be unprotected, for example, the ***actuator*** endpoints in this
  case. Refer to the source code for URLs that are treated as unprotected. Be careful
  about which URLs are exposed unprotected. For example, the ***actuator***
  endpoints should be protected before going to production:
    - ***.anyExchange().authenticated()*** ensures that the user is authenticated before being allowed access to all other URLs.
    - ***.oauth2ResourceServer().jwt()*** specifies that authentication and authorization will be based on a JWT-encoded OAuth 2.0 access token.

  - The endpoint of the authorization server's jwk-set endpoint has been registered in the configuration file, ***application.yml***:
    ```
    spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.jwk-set-uri: http://${app.auth-server}:9999/.well-known/jwks.json
    ```
With these changes applied to both the edge server and the ***product-composite*** service to
make them act as OAuth 2.0 resource servers, we also need to make some changes that only
apply to the ***product-composite*** service.

## Changes in the product-composite service
In addition to the common changes applied in the previous section, the following changes have also been applied to the ***product-composite*** service:
- The security configuration ( Chapter11\microservices\product-composite-service\src\main\java\se\magnus\microservices\composite\product\SecurityConfig.java) has been refined by requiring OAuth 2.0 scopes in the access token in order to allow access:
  ```java
  .pathMatchers(POST, "/product-composite/**").hasAuthority("SCOPE_product:write")
  .pathMatchers(DELETE, "/product-composite/**").hasAuthority("SCOPE_product:write")
  .pathMatchers(GET, "/product-composite/**").hasAuthority("SCOPE_product:read")
  ```
    - By convention, OAuth 2.0 scopes should be prefixed with ***SCOPE_ when*** checked for authority using Spring Security.
- A method, logAuthorizationInfo(), has been added to log relevant parts
from the JWT-encoded access token upon each call to the API. The access token
can be acquired using the standard Spring Security, SecurityContext, which,
in a reactive environment, can be acquired using the static helper method,
ReactiveSecurityContextHolder.getContext(). Refer to the ***se.magnus.microservices.composite.product.services.ProductCompositeServiceImpl*** class for details.
- The use of OAuth has been disabled when running Spring-based integration tests. To prevent the OAuth machinery from kicking in when we are running integration tests, we disable it as follows:
  - A security configuration, TestSecurityConfig, is added to be used during tests that permit access to all resources:
    ```
    http.csrf().disable().authorizeExchange().anyExchange().permitAll();
    ```
  - In each Spring integration test class, we configure TestSecurityConfig to override the existing security configuration with the following:
    ```java
    @SpringBootTest( classes ={ProductCompositeServiceApplication.class,TestSecurityConfig.class },
                     properties = {"spring.main.allow-bean-definitionoverriding=true"})
    ```
With these changes in place, both the edge server and the product-composite service can
act as OAuth 2.0 resource servers. The last step we need to take to introduce the usage of
OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect is to update the test script so it acquires access tokens and
uses them when running the tests.

## Changes in the test script
To start with, we need to acquire an access token before we can call any of the APIs, except
the health API. This is done using the OAuth 2.0 password flow. To be able to call the
create and delete APIs, we acquire an access token as the writer client, as follows:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl -k https://writer:secret@$HOST:$PORT/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .access_token -r)
```
To verify that the scope-based authorization works, two tests have been added to the test
script:
  - The first test calls an API without supplying an access token. The API is expected to return the 401 Unauthorized HTTP status.
  - The other test calls an updating API using the reader client, which is only granted a read scope. The API is expected to return the 403 Forbidden HTTP status.
For the full source code, see ***test-em-all.bash***:
```bash
# Verify that a request without access token fails on 401, Unauthorized
assertCurl 401 "curl -k https://$HOST:$PORT/product-composite/$PROD_ID_REVS_RECS -s"

# Verify that the reader - client with only read scope can call the read API but not delete API.
READER_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl -k https://reader:secret@$HOST:$PORT/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .access_token -r)
READER_AUTH="-H \"Authorization: Bearer $READER_ACCESS_TOKEN\""

assertCurl 200 "curl -k https://$HOST:$PORT/product-composite/$PROD_ID_REVS_RECS $READER_AUTH -s"
assertCurl 403 "curl -k https://$HOST:$PORT/product-composite/$PROD_ID_REVS_RECS $READER_AUTH -X DELETE -s"

```
With the test scripts updated to acquire and use OAuth 2.0 access tokens, we are ready to try them out in the next section!
