<!-- MarkdownTOC -->
- [Testing with the local authorization server](#testing-with-the-local-authorization-server)
	- [Building and running the automated tests](#building-and-running-the-automated-tests)
	- [Acquiring access tokens](#acquiring-access-tokens)	
		- [Acquiring access tokens using the password grant flow](#acquiring-access-tokens-using-the-password-grant-flow)
		- [Acquiring access tokens using the implicit grant flow](#acquiring-access-tokens-using-the-implicit-grant-flow)
		- [Acquiring access tokens using the code grant flow](#acquiring-access-tokens-using-the-code-grant-flow)
	- [Calling protected APIs using access tokens](#calling-protected-apis-using-access-tokens)		
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->
# Testing with the local authorization server
In this section we will try out the secured system landscape; that is, we will test all the
security components together. We will use the local authorization server to issue access
tokens. The following tests will be performed:
1. First, we build from source and run the test script to ensure that everything fits
together.
2. Next, we learn how to acquire access tokens using OAuth 2.0 grant flows:
password, implicit, and code grant flows.
3. Finally, we will use access tokens to call APIs. We will also verify that an access
token issued for a reader client can't be used to call an updating API.

## Building and running the automated tests
To build and run automated tests, we perform the following steps:
1. First, build Docker images with the following commands:
```
cd $BOOK_HOME/Chapter11
./gradlew build && docker-compose build
```
2. Next, start the system landscape in Docker and run the usual tests with the
following command:
```
./test-em-all.bash start
```
- Note the new negative tests at the end that verify that we get a 401
Unauthorized code back when not authenticated, and 403 Forbidden
when not authorized.

## Acquiring access tokens
Now we can acquire access tokens using the various grant flows defined by OAuth 2.0. We
will try out the following grant flows: password, implicit, and code grant.

### Acquiring access tokens using the password grant flow
To get an access token for the ***writer*** client, that is, with both the ***product:read*** and ***product:write*** scopes, issue the following command:

```
curl -k https://writer:secret@localhost:8443/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .
```

The client identifies itself using HTTP basic authentication, passing its writer client ID,
and its secret, secret. It sends the credentials of the resource owners, that is the end user,
using the username and password parameters.

A sample response is as follows:
```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIiOiJtYWdudXMiLCJleHAiOjIyMTkzNTQ4NjYsImF1dGhvcml0aWVzIjpbIlJPTEVfVVNFUiJdLCJqdGkiOiJZYStsZXpocDluNlhseE9pNU5tN1ZtM1UrKzQ9IiwiY2xpZW50X2lkIjoid3JpdGVyIiwic2NvcGUiOlsicHJvZHVjdDpyZWFkIiwicHJvZHVjdDp3cml0ZSJdfQ.Gz3SWm3UXaWlwdiEAU-0S4nBZSaQGjMOLGrKpr2WNRzSGp1gbhKKGsDX0761yBy75g5ckZnF5Kx_cQmyXAC-yt_NdByKiXrUpS4lolgLU3WLPSdClvoEaSwjFhxQyK4hqXFddwEgcDXjF0POjJ5s1n-LmP97CPovTMI8aKE91UUf8UIv5rTNGdxg8ohDPLlB7h8kGmJ6aHhNluMpkvfs7rB1a-5pW2PBRHVkLMaXXj9YhAS2sJswvghnL5vW25L90esyn7WG4PrRiVlJcr4dNy5UQU1ok0RyM-hMz-arqOaLe5OYBoYCnGvd0AE3WDfxh7d-JjFg3NQRdyT9OVDpbg",
  "token_type": "bearer",
  "expires_in": 599999999,
  "scope": "product:read product:write",
  "jti": "Ya+lezhp9n6XlxOi5Nm7Vm3U++4="
}
```

Set the value of the access_token field in the response as the access token in
an environment variable:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=eyJ...VDpbg
```
To get an access token for the ***reader*** client, that is, with only the ***product:read*** scope,simply replace ***writer*** with ***reader*** in the preceding command:

```
curl -k https://reader:secret@localhost:8443/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .

{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIiOiJtYWdudXMiLCJleHAiOjIyMTkzNTQ5ODQsImF1dGhvcml0aWVzIjpbIlJPTEVfVVNFUiJdLCJqdGkiOiJ6eEplMjBWTks0MG82RENuSkN4ZTBwSkx3MGM9IiwiY2xpZW50X2lkIjoicmVhZGVyIiwic2NvcGUiOlsicHJvZHVjdDpyZWFkIl19.DFs4sIdgXCyCppG88WBguL4mEiCT89ip2LlAZw5QrCVGW76kfAI47jOVlIdzcUGK3nW1q94FDH2SHKJPL6hL0ptpC6PEtTx4VmDJ983sCDDMkf3hsYXrcDgBdZBawZrFlp3QuHX6fhk6mm0LXLeiSPUIKSffOcKBsb2FWsR7sNoVQG0BmDn5i5q9B5r3jcI7S5VeCxRXwb2uHYE4_FUSpjcFua-U2ulP1Z015FnX8pJCwZygcCxC-Hd4JRuThOhaLqkgxM9IqCWFBNhuoE5bZMYPCzm_HzUknJTJAquiMx3BY3ljucX3DIzHsiP14H6VZB38_sz7sCUSSCoAsZk4bw",
  "token_type": "bearer",
  "expires_in": 599999999,
  "scope": "product:read",
  "jti": "zxJe20VNK40o6DCnJCxe0pJLw0c="
}
```

### Acquiring access tokens using the implicit grant flow
To acquire an access token using the implicit grant flow, we need to involve a web browser.
Open the URL in a web browser that accepts the use of self-signed certificates, for example,
Chrome. Then perform the following steps:

1. To get an access token for the reader client open the URL,***https://localhost:8443/oauth/authorize?response_type=token&client_id=reader&redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri&scope=product:read&state=48532***. When asked to login by the web browser, use the
credentials specified in the configuration of the authorization server, for example, ***magnus*** and ***password***:

2. Next, you will be asked to authorize the reader client to call the APIs in your name:
3. Finally, we will get the following response:

This might, at first glance, look a bit disappointing. The URL that the authorization server
sent back to the web browser is based on the redirect-URI specified by the client in the
initial request. Copy the URL into a text editor and you will find something similar to the
following:
```
http://my.redirect.uri/#access_token=eyJh...C8pw&token_type=bearer&state=48532&expires_in=599999999&jti=8956b38b-36ea-4888-80dc-685b49f20f91
```
Great! We can find the access token in the new URL in the access_token request parameter.
Save the access token in an environment variable, as shown:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=eyJh...C8pw
```
To get an access token for the writer client, you can use the following URL:
```
https://localhost:8443/oauth/authorize?response_type=token&client_id=writer&redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri&scope=product:read+product:write&state=95372.
```
You are already authenticated, so you do not need to log in again, but you must give yourconsent to the writer client.

- Note that no client secret is required; that is, the implicit grant flow is not very secure.
- Any application can claim that it is the writer client and can ask for the
user's consent to use the requested scopes to access APIs in the name of
the user, so beware!

### Acquiring access tokens using the code grant flow
Finally, let's try out the most secure grant flow in OAuth 2.0 – the code grant flow!

When it comes to the code grant flow, things are a bit more complicated in order to make
the flow more secure. In the first insecure step, we will use the web browser to acquire a
code that can be used only once, when it is exchanged with an access token. The code shall
be passed from the web browser to a secure layer, for example, server-side code, which can
make a new request the authorization server again to exchange the code with an access
token. In this exchange, the server has to supply a client secret to verify its origin.

To get a code for the ***reader*** client, use the following URL in the web browser: ****https://localhost:8443/oauth/authorize?response_type=code&client_id=reader&redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri&scope=product:read&state=35725***.

This time, you will get back a much shorter URL, for example,
```
http://my.redirect.uri/?code=T2pxvW&state=72489
```
.

Extract the authorization ***code*** from the code parameter and define an environment
variable, ***CODE***, with its value:
```
CODE=T2pxvW
```
Next, pretend you are the backend server that exchanges the authorization code with an access token using the following curl command:
```bash
curl -k https://reader:secret@localhost:8443/oauth/token \
-d grant_type=authorization_code \
-d client_id=reader \
-d redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri \
-d code=$CODE -s | jq .
```
A sample response is as follows:

Finally, save the access token in an environment variable as previously:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=eyJh...KUBA
```
To get a code for the ***writer*** client, use the following URL: 
```
https://localhost:8443/oauth/authorize?response_type=code&client_id=writer&redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri&scope=product:read+product:write&state=72489
```
.

## Calling protected APIs using access tokens
Now, let's use the access tokens we have acquired to call the protected APIs!
1. First, call an API to retrieve a composite product without a valid access token:
    ```
    ACCESS_TOKEN=an-invalid-token
    curl https://localhost:8443/product-composite/2 -k -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -i
    ```
2. It should return the following response:

The error message clearly states that the access token is invalid!

3. Next, try using the API to retrieve a composite product using one of the access
tokens acquired for the reader client from the previous section:
    ```
    ACCESS_TOKEN={a-reader-access-token}
    curl https://localhost:8443/product-composite/2 -k -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -i
    ```
4. Now we will get the 200 OK status code and the expected response body will be
returned:

If we try to access an updating API, for example, the delete API, with an access token
acquired for the reader client, the call will fail:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN={a-reader-access-token}
curl https://localhost:8443/product-composite/999 -k -H "Authorization:Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -X DELETE -i
```
It will fail with a response similar to the following:

If we repeat the call to the delete API, but with an access token acquired for the writer client, the call will succeed with 200 OK in the response.
- The delete operation should return 200 even if the product with the
specified product ID does not exist in the underlying database, since the
delete operation is idempotent, as described in Chapter 6, Adding
Persistence. Refer to the Adding new APIs section.

If you look into the log output using the ***docker-compose logs -f product-composite***
command, you should be able to find authorization information such as the
following:

This information was extracted by the new method, ***logAuthorizationInfo()***, in the
***product-composite*** service from the JWT-encoded access token; that is, the ***product-composite***
service did not need to communicate with the authorization server to get this
information!
 
With these tests, we have seen how to acquire an access token with the various grant flows,
that is, password, implicit, and code grant flow. We have also seen how scopes can be used
to limit what a client can do with a specific access token, for example only use is for reading
operations.

In the next section, we will replace the local authorization server used in this section to an
external OpenID Connect provider.
