<!-- MarkdownTOC -->
- [Testing with an OpenID Connect provider–Auth0](#testing-with-the-local-authorization-server)
	- [Setting up an account and OAuth 2.0 client in Auth0](#building-and-running-the-automated-tests)
	- [Applying the necessary changes to use Auth0 as an OpenID provider](#acquiring-access-tokens)	
		- [Changing the configuration in the OAuth resource servers](#changing-the-configuration-in-the-oauth-resource-servers)
		- [Changing the test script so it acquires access tokens from Auth0](#changing-the-test-script-so-it-acquires-access-tokens-from-auth0)
	- [Running the test script with Auth0 as the OpenID Connect provider](#running-the-test-script-with-auth0-as-the-openid-connect-provider)
	- [Acquiring access tokens using the password grant flow](#acquiring-access-tokens-using-the-password-grant-flow)
	- [Acquiring access tokens using the implicit grant flow](#acquiring-access-tokens-using-the-implicit-grant-flow)
	- [Acquiring access tokens using the authorization code grant flow](#acquiring-access-tokens-using-the-authorization-code-grant-flow)
	- [Calling protected APIs using the Auth0 access tokens](#calling-protected-apis-using-the-auth0-access-tokens)
	- [Getting extra information about the user](#getting-extra-information-about-the-user)
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->
# Testing with an OpenID Connect provider–Auth0
So , the OAuth dance works fine with an authorization server we control ourselves. But
what happens if we replace it with a certified OpenID Connect provider? In theory, it
should work out of the box. Let's find out, shall we?

For a list of certified implementations of OpenID Connect, refer to ***https://openid.net/developers/certified/*** . We will use Auth0, ***https://auth0.com/*** , for our tests with
an OpenID provider. To be able to use Auth0 instead of our own authorization server, we
will go through the following topics:

- Setting up an account with an OAuth client and a user in Auth0
- Applying the changes required to use Auth0 as an OpenID provider and running
the test script to verify whether it is working
- Acquiring access tokens using the following:
    - Password grant flow
    - Implicit grant flow
    - Authorization code grant flow
- Calling protected APIs using the access tokens.
- Using the user info endpoint to get more information about a user.

Let us understand each of them in the following sections.

## Setting up an account and OAuth 2.0 client in Auth0
Perform the following steps to sign up for a free account in Auth0, configure both an
OAuth 2.0 client and the ***product-composite*** API, and finally register a user:
1. Open the URL, https://auth0.com, in your browser.
2. Click on the SIGN UP button:
    1. Sign up with an account of your choice.
    2. After a successful sign-up, you will be asked to create a tenant domain.
    Enter the name of the tenant of your choice, in my case: ***dev-ml.eu.auth0.com*** (This tenant domain name is taken, please try another one.).
    3. Fill in information about your account as requested.
3. Following sign-up, you will be directed to your dashboard. Select the
***Applications*** tab (on the left) to see the default client application that was created
for you during the sign-up process.
4. Click on the ***Default App*** to configure it:
    1. Copy the ***Client ID*** and ***Client Secret*** ; you will need them later on.
    2. As ***Application Type***, select ***Machine to Machine***.
    3. As ***Token Endpoint Authentication Method*** , select ***POST*** .
    4. Enter ***http://my.redirect.uri*** as the allowed callback URL.
    5. Click on ***Show Advanced Settings*** , go to the ***Grant Types*** tab, deselect
    ***Client Credentials*** , and select the ***Password*** box.
    6. Click on ***SAVE CHANGES*** .
5. Now define authorizations for our API:
    1. Click on the ***APIs*** tab (on the left) and click on the + ***CREATE API*** button.
    2. Name the API ***product-composite***, give it the identifier ***https://localhost:8443/product-composite***, and click on the ***CREATE*** button.
    3. Click on the ***Permissions*** tab and create two permissions (that is, ***OAuth*** scopes) for ***product:read*** and ***product:write***.
6. Next, create a user:
    1. Click on the ***Users & Roles*** and -> ***Users*** tab (on the left) and then on
    the + ***CREATE YOUR FIRST USER*** button.
    2. Enter an ***email*** and ***password*** of your preference and click on the
    SAVE button.
    3. Look for a verification mail from Auth0 in the Inbox for the email
    address you supplied.
7. Finally, validate your ***Default Directory*** setting, used for the password grant
flow:
    1. Click on your tenant profile in the upper-right corner and select ***Settings***.
    2. In the tab named ***General*** , scroll down to the field named ***Default Directory*** and verify that it contains the ***Username-Password-Authentication*** value. If not, update the field and save the change.
8. That's it! Note that both the default app and the API get a client ID and secret.We will use the client ID and secret for the default app; that is, the OAuth client.

With an Auth0 account created and configured we can move on and apply the necessary configuration changes in the system landscape.

## Applying the necessary changes to use Auth0 as an OpenID provider

In this section we will learn what configuration changes are required to be able to replace
the local authorization server with Auth0. We only need to change the configuration for the
two services that act as OAuth resource servers, the ***product-composite***, and
the ***gateway*** services. We also need to change our test script a bit, so that it acquires the
access tokens from Auth0 instead of from our local authorization server. Let's start with
the OAuth resource servers, that is, the ***product-composite*** and the ***gateway*** services.

- The changes described in this topic have not been applied to the source
code in the book's Git repository; that is, you need to make them yourself
to see them in action!

### Changing the configuration in the OAuth resource servers
When using an OpenID Connect provider, we only have to configure the base URI to the
standardized discovery endpoint in the OAuth resource servers, that is, the ***product-composite***
and the ***gateway*** service. Spring Security will use the information in the
response from the discovery endpoint to configure the resource server.

In the ***product-composite*** and ***gateway*** projects, make the following change to the ***resource/application.yml*** file:

Now find the following property setting:
```
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.jwk-set-uri: http://${app.auth-server}:9999/.well-known/jwks.json
```

Replace it with:
```
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri:https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/
```

Note: Replace ***${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}*** in the preceding configuration with your tenant
domain name; in my case, it is ***dev-ml.eu.auth0.com***, and do not forget the trailing /!

- If you are curious, you can see what's in the discovery document by running the following command:
  ```
  curl https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/.well-known/openid-configuration -s | jq
  ```
  - [reference By Microsoft](https://docs.microsoft.com/zh-tw/azure/active-directory/develop/v2-protocols-oidc)
  - [reference By Akana](https://docs.akana.com/cm/api_oauth/oauth_discovery/m_oauth_getOpenIdConnectWellknownConfiguration.htm)
  - [reference By Auth0](https://auth0.com/docs/protocols/configure-applications-with-oidc-discovery)
  - 
Rebuild the ***product-composite*** and gateway services as follows:
```
cd $BOOK_HOME/Chapter11
./gradlew build && docker-compose up -d --build product-composite gateway
```

With the ***product-composite*** and the ***gateway*** service updated, we can move on and also update the test script.

### Changing the test script so it acquires access tokens from Auth0

We also need to update the test script so it acquires access tokens from the Auth0 OIDC
provider. This is done by performing the following changes in test-em-all.bash.

Take the following command:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl http://writer:secret@$HOST:$PORT/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .access_token -r)
```
Replace it with this command:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl --request POST \
--url 'https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/json' \
--data '{"grant_type":"password", "username":"${USER_EMAIL}","password":"${USER_PASSWORD}","audience":"https://localhost:8443/product-composite", "scope":"openid email product:read product:write", "client_id": "${CLIENT_ID}","client_secret": "${CLIENT_SECRET}"}' -s | jq -r .access_token)
```
Now, replace ${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}, ${USER_EMAIL}, ${USER_PASSWORD},
${CLIENT_ID}, and ${CLIENT_SECRET} in the preceding command with the values you
collected during the registration process in Auth0, as described previously. Then, take the
following command:
```
READER_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl -k https://reader:secret@$HOST:$PORT/oauth/token -d grant_type=password -d username=magnus -d password=password -s | jq .access_token -r)
```
Replace it with this command:
```
READER_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl --request POST \
--url 'https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/json' \
--data '{"grant_type":"password", "username":"${USER_EMAIL}","password":"${USER_PASSWORD}","audience":"https://localhost:8443/product-composite", "scope":"openid email product:read", "client_id": "${CLIENT_ID}", "client_secret":
"${CLIENT_SECRET}"}' -s | jq -r .access_token)
```
Apply the preceding changes to the command. Also note that we only require the ***product:read*** scope and not the ***product:write*** scope. This is to simulate a client with
read-only access.

Now access tokens are issued by Auth0 instead of our local authorization server, and our
API implementations can verify that the access tokens (have been correctly signed by Auth0
and have not expired), using information from Auth0's discovery service flagged in the
***application.yml*** files. The API implementations can, as before, use the scopes in the
access tokens to authorize the client to perform the call to the API, or not.

Now we have all the required changes in place, let's run some tests to verify that we can
acquire access tokens from Auth0.

## Running the test script with Auth0 as the OpenID Connect provider

Now, we are ready to give Auth0 a try!

Run the usual tests against Auth0 with the following command:
```
./test-em-all.bash
```
In the logs (using the docker-compose logs -f product-composite command), you
will be able to find authorization information from the access tokens issued by Auth0:

From calls using an access token with both the ***product:read*** and ***product:write*** scopes, we will see that both scopes are listed as follows:

From calls using an access token with only the product:read scope, we will see that only that scope is listed as follows:

- As we can see from the log output, we now get information regarding the
intended audience for this access token. To strengthen security, we could
add a test to our service that verifies that its URL,
***https://localhost:8443/product-composite*** in this case, is part of
the audience list. This would prevent the situation where someone tries to
use an access token issued for another purpose to get access to our API.

With the automated tests working together with Auth0, we can move on and learn how to
acquire access tokens using the different types of grant flow. Let's start with the password
grant flow.

## Acquiring access tokens using the password grant flow

In this section we will learn how to acquire an access token from Auth0 using the password
grant flow.
If you want to acquire an access token from Auth0 yourself, you can do so by running the
following command:
```
curl --request POST \
--url 'https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/json' \
--data '{"grant_type":"password", "username":"${USER_EMAIL}","password":"${USER_PASSWORD}","audience":"https://localhost:8443/product-composite", "scope":"openid email product:read", "client_id": "${CLIENT_ID}", "client_secret": "${CLIENT_SECRET}"}' -s | jq
```
Following the instruction in the Calling protected APIs using the access tokens section, you
should be able to call the APIs using the acquired access token. The next grant flow we'll try
out is the implicit grant flow.


## Acquiring access tokens using the implicit grant flow
In this section, we will learn how to acquire an access token from Auth0 using the implicit
grant flow.

If you want to try out the more involved implicit grant flow, you can open the following
URL in a web browser:
```
https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/authorize?response_type=token&scope=openid email product:read product:write&client_id=${CLIENT_ID}&state=98421&&nonce=jxdlsjfi0fa&redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri&audience=https://localhost:8443/product-composite
```
- Replace ${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME} and ${CLIENT_ID} in the preceding URL with the tenant domain name and client ID you collected during the registration process in Auth0 as described previously. 

Let's have a look at the following steps:
1. Auth0 should present the following login screen:
2. Following a successful login, Auth0 will ask you to give the client application your consent:

The access token is now in the URL in the browser, just like when we tried out the implicit
flow in our local authorization server:

- To get an access token that corresponds to the reader client, remove the
product:write scope from the preceding URL that we used to initiate
the implicit grant flow.

Now that we know how to acquire an access token using the implicit grant flow, we can
move on to the third and last grant flow that we will try out, the authorization code grant
flow.

## Acquiring access tokens using the authorization code grant flow

Finally, we come to the most secure grant flow – the authorization code grant flow. We will
follow the same procedure as with the local authorization server; that is, we first acquire
code and then exchange it for an access token. Get the code by opening the following URL
in a web browser, as follows:
```
https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/authorize?audience=https://localhost:8443/product-composite&scope=openid email product:read product:write&response_type=code&client_id=${CLIENT_ID}&redirect_uri=http://my.redirect.uri&state=845361
```
- Replace ${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME} and ${CLIENT_ID} in the preceding
URL with the tenant domain name and client ID you collected during the
registration process in Auth0 as described previously.

Expect a redirect attempt in the web browser to a URL as follows:
```
http://my.redirect.uri/?code=6mQ7HK--WyX9fMnv&state=845361
```
Extract the code and run the following command to get the access token:
```
curl --request POST \
--url 'https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/json' \
--data '{"grant_type":"authorization_code","client_id":"${CLIENT_ID}","client_secret": "${CLIENT_SECRET}","code":"${CODE}","redirect_uri": "http://my.redirect.uri"}' -s | jq .
```
Replace ${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}, ${CLIENT_ID}, ${CLIENT_SECRET}, and ${CODE} in
the preceding URL with the tenant domain name, client ID, and the client code you
collected during the registration process in Auth0 as described previously.

Now that we have learned how to acquire access tokens using all three types of grant flows,
we are ready to try calling the external API using an access token acquired from Auth0 in
the next section.
## Calling protected APIs using the Auth0 access tokens

In this section, we will see how we can use an access token acquired from Auth0 to call the
external API.

We can use access tokens issued by Auth0 to call our APIs just like when we used access
tokens issued by our local authorization server.

For a read-only API, execute the following command:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=...
curl https://localhost:8443/product-composite/2 -k -H "Authorization:Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -i
```
For an updating API, execute the following command:
```
ACCESS_TOKEN=...
curl https://localhost:8443/product-composite/999 -k -H "Authorization:Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -X DELETE -i
```
Since we have requested both scopes, ***product:read*** and ***product:write***, both the preceding API calls are expected to return 200 OK.

## Getting extra information about the user
As you can see in the log output, the ID of the subject, that is, the user, is a bit cryptic, for
example, ***auth0|5ca0b73c97f31e11bc85a5e6***.

If you want your API implementation to know a bit more about the user, it can call
Auth0's userinfo_endpoint as described in the response to the discovery request made
previously:
```
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" https://${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME}/userinfo -s | jq
```
Replace ${TENANT_DOMAIN_NAME} in the preceding command with the tenant domain
name you collected during the registration process in Auth0 as described previously.

A sample response is as follows:

- This endpoint can also be used to verify that the user hasn't revoked the
access token in Auth0.

Wrap up the tests by shutting down the system landscape with the following command:
```
docker-compose down
```

This concludes the section where we have learned how to replace the local OAuth 2.0
Authorization server, only used for tests, with an external alternative. We have also seen
how to reconfigure the microservice landscape to validate access tokens using an
external OIDC provider.
