# Setting up alarms in Grafana
Being able to monitor the circuit breaker and retry metrics is of great value, but even more important is the capability to define automated alarms on these metrics. Automated alarms relieve us from monitoring the metrics manually.

Grafana comes with built-in support for defining alarms and sending notifications to a number of destinations. In this section we will define alerts on the circuit breaker and configure Grafana to send emails to the test mail server when alerts are raised. The local test mail server was installed in section Installing a local mail server for tests.

In the next section, we will define a mail-based notification channel that will be used by the alert in the section after this.

## Setting up a mail-based notification channel

To configure a mail-based notification channel in Grafana, perform the following steps:

1. On the Grafana web page, on the menu to the left, click on the Alerting menu choice (with an alarm bell as its icon) and select Notification channels.
2. Click on the Add channel button.
3. Set the name to mail.
4. Select the type to Email.
5. Enable Send on all alerts.
6. Enable Include image.
7. Enter an email address of your choice. Emails will only be sent to the local test mail server, independent of what email address that's specified. The configuration of the notification channel should look as follows:
8. Click on the Send Test button to send a test mail.
9. Click on the Save button.
10. Click on the Dashboard button in the left-hand side menu and then on the home button.
11. Select Hands-on Dashboard from the list to get back to the dashboard.
12. Check the test mail server's web page to ensure that we have received a test email. You should receive the following output:


With a notification channel in place, we are ready to define an alert on the circuit breaker.

## Setting up an alarm on the circuit breaker

To create an alarm on the circuit breaker, we need to create the alert and then add an alert list to the dashboard, where we can see what alert events have occurred over time.

Perform the following steps to create an alert for the circuit breaker:

1. In the Hands-on Dashboard, click on the header of the circuit breaker panel. A drop-down menu will appear.
2. Select the Edit menu option.
3. Select the Alert tab in the tab list to the left (shown as an alarm bell icon).
4. Click on the Create Alert button.
5. In the Evaluate every field, set the value to 10s.
6. In the For field, set the value to 0m.
7. In the Conditions section, specify the following values: 
    - Set the WHEN field to max().
    - Set the OF field to query(A, 1m, now). 
    - Set the IS ABOVE field to 0.5.
8. Scroll down to confirm that the notification has been sent to the default notification channel, that is, the mail channel we defined previously. The alarm definition should look as follows:
9. Click on the back button (left arrow) to get back to the dashboard.


Then, we need to perform the following steps to create an alarm list:
1. Click on the Add panel button at the top of the page. 
2. Select Choose Visualization in the New Panel page.    
3. Among the presented visualizations, select Alert List. Click on it twice to display an Options list.
4. Select the Show option called Recent state changes.
5. Enable Alerts from this dashboard. The settings should look as follows:
6. Click on the back button to get back to the dashboard.
7. Rearrange the panel to suit your needs.
8. Save the changes to the dashboard.


Here is a sample layout with the alarm list added:

We can see that the circuit breaker reports the metrics as healthy (with a green heart) and that the alert list contains an OK event for the circuit breaker.

Now, it's time to try out the alarm!

## Trying out the circuit breaker alarm

Here, we will repeat the tests from the Testing the circuit breaker metrics section, but this time, we expect alarms to be raised and emails to be sent as well! Let's get started:

1. Start by opening the circuit breaker:
```
for ((n=0; n<3; n++)); do curl -o /dev/null -skL -w  "%{http_code}\n" https://minikube.me/product-composite/2?delay=3 -H  Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -s; done
```

The dashboard should report the circuit as open as it did previously. After a minute, an alarm should be raised and an email should also be sent. Expect the dashboard to look similar to the following screenshot:
Take note of the alarm icon in the header of the circuit breaker panel (a red broken heart). The red line marks the time of the alert event and that an alert has been added to the alert list.

2. In the test mail server, you should see an email, as shown in the following screenshot:

3. Great; we got alarms, just like we expected! Now, close the circuit, making the problem go away with the following command:
```
for ((n=0; n<3; n++)); do curl -o /dev/null -skL -w  "%{http_code}\n" https://minikube.me/product-composite/2?delay=0 -H  "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" -s; done
```

The metric should go back to normal, that is 0, and after a minute, the alert should go green again.

Expect the dashboard to look like the following screenshot:

Note that the alarm icon in the header of the circuit breaker panel is green again; the green line marks the time for the OK event and that an OK event has been added in the alert list.

In the test mail server, you should see an email, as shown in the following screenshot:

That completes how to monitor microservices using Prometheus and Grafana.
